Dawn is the time that marks the beginning of twilight before sunrise. It is recognized by the appearance of indirect sunlight being scattered in Earth's atmosphere, when the centre of the Sun's disc has reached 18° below the observer's horizon.[1] This morning twilight period will last until sunrise (when the Sun's upper limb breaks the horizon), when direct sunlight outshines the diffused light.


Civil, nautical, and astronomical dawn, when defined as the beginning time of the corresponding twilight[2]
Etymology
"Dawn" derives from the Old English verb dagian, "to become day".

Types of dawn
Dawn begins with the first sight of lightness in the morning, and continues until the Sun breaks the horizon. The morning twilight is divided in three phases, which are determined by the angular distance of the centre of the Sun (degrees below the horizon) in the morning. These are astronomical, nautical and civil twilight.

Astronomical dawn
Main article: Twilight § Astronomical twilight

Dawn at La Silla Observatory, Chile[3]
Astronomical dawn begins when the center of the Sun is 18 degrees below the horizon in the morning. Astronomical twilight follows instantly until the center of the Sun is 12 degrees below the horizon.[4] At this point, a very small portion of the Sun's rays illuminate the sky and the fainter stars begin to disappear. Astronomical dawn is often indistinguishable from night, especially in areas with light pollution. Astronomical dawn marks the beginning of astronomical twilight, which lasts until nautical dawn.[5]

Nautical dawn
Main article: Twilight § Nautical twilight
Nautical twilight begins when there is enough light for sailors to distinguish the horizon at sea, but the sky is still too dark to perform outdoor activities. It begins when the center of the Sun is 12 degrees below the horizon in the morning. Nautical dawn marks the start of nautical twilight, which lasts until civil dawn.[5][4]

Civil dawn
Main article: Twilight § Civil twilight

Serra dos Órgãos National Park, in Rio de Janeiro state, Brazil, at dawn
Civil dawn begins when there is enough light for most objects to be distinguishable, so that some outdoor activities can commence. It occurs when the center of the Sun is 6 degrees below the horizon in the morning.[4]

When the sky is clear, it is blue colored, and if there are clouds or haze, bronze, orange and yellow colors are seen. Some bright stars and planets such as Venus and Jupiter are still visible to the naked eye at civil dawn. This moment marks the start of civil twilight, which lasts until sunrise.[5]

Effects of latitude

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (July 2022) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
The duration of the morning twilight (i.e. between astronomical dawn and sunrise) varies greatly depending on the observer's latitude: from a little over 70 minutes at the Equator, to many hours in the polar regions.[6][7]

The Equator
The period of twilight is shortest at the Equator, where the equinox Sun rises due east and sets due west, at a right angle to the horizon. Each stage of twilight (civil, nautical, and astronomical) lasts only 24 minutes. From anywhere on Earth, the twilight period is shortest around the equinoxes and longest on the solstices.[citation needed]